=== install to sambook ===
 1. download: https://mirror.yandex.ru/gentoo-distfiles/releases/amd64/autobuilds/current-install-amd64-minimal/install-amd64-minimal-<somedate>.iso
 2. write to usb flash 
 3. boot from livecd
 4. create swap and root partitions over cfdisk (dos)
 5. mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda2; mkswap /dev/sda1; swapon /dev/sda1
 6. mount /dev/sda2 /mnt/gentoo
 7. up network:
{{{sh
ip link set dev wlp1s0 up
wpa_passphrase <SSID> >> /etc/wpa_supplicant.conf
wpa_supplicant -B -D wext -i wlp1s0 -c /etc/wpa_supplicant.conf
dhcpcd wlp1s0
}}}
 8. ntpd -q -g
 9. cd /mnt/gentoo
 10. links https://www.gentoo.org/downloads/mirrors/ and select mirror
 11. go to the releases/amd64/autobuilds/ directory
 12. downloads: https://mirror.ps.kz/gentoo/pub/releases/amd64/autobuilds/current-stage3-amd64/stage3-amd64-20200422T214502Z.tar.xz
 13. openssl dgst -r -sha512 stage3-amd64-<release>.tar.?(bz2|xz) and compare with content of .DIGESTS(.asc) file
 14. tar xpvf stage3-*.tar.bz2 --xattrs-include='*.*' --numeric-owner
 15. vi etc/portage/make.conf (add MAKEOPTS="-j4")
 16. mirrorselect -i -o >> etc/portage/make.conf (GENTOO_MIRRORS="http://mirror.ps.kz/gentoo/pub/")
 17. mkdir etc/portage/repos.conf
 18. cp usr/share/portage/config/repos.conf etc/portage/repos.conf/gentoo.conf
 19. cp -L /etc/resolv.conf etc/
 20. mount -t proc /proc proc/
 21. mount -R /sys sys/
 22. mount -R /dev dev/
 23. chroot . /bin/bash
 24. source /etc/profile
 25. export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"
 26. emerge-webrsync
 27. emerge --ask --verbose --update --deep --newuse @world
 28. echo "Asia/Tomsk" > /etc/timezone
 29. emerge --config sys-libs/timezone-data
 30. emerge --ask vim
 31. vim /etc/locale.gen (uncomment: en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8)
 32. locale-gen
 33. eselect locale list
 34. eselect locale set 4
 35. env-update && source /etc/profile && export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"
 36. emerge --ask sys-kernel/gentoo-sources
 37. emerge --ask sys-kernel/genkernel
 38. genkernel all; ls /boot/kernel* /boot/initramfs*
 39. emerge --ask sys-kernel/linux-firmware
 40. vim /etc/fstab
 41. passwd
 42. emerge --ask app-admin/sysklogd
 43. rc-update add sysklogd default
 44. rc-update add sshd default
 45. emerge --ask sys-fs/e2fsprogs
 46. emerge --ask net-misc/dhcpcd
 47. emerge --ask sys-boot/lilo
 48. emerge --ask tmux
 49. vim /etc/lilo.conf; lilo
 50. exit
 51. cd
 52. umount -l /mnt/gentoo/dev{/shm,/pts,}
 53. umount -R /mnt/gentoo
 54. reboot
----
 - https://www.gentoo.org/get-started/
 - https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64

=== distcc for emerge ===
 1. ssh root@calculate
     1. emerge --ask sys-devel/distcc
     2. vim /etc/conf.d/distccd
         {{{sh
         # add some like this:
         DISTCCD_OPTS="--port 3632 -N 15
         --log-level notice --log-file /var/log/distccd.log
         --allow 192.168.0.4 --allow 192.168.0.5"
         }}}
     3. rc-update add distccd default
     4. rc-service distccd start
 2. distcc-config --set-hosts "localhost,cpp,lzo calculate,cpp,lzo"
 3. vim /etc/portage/make.conf
     {{{conf
     # 1 remote hosts with 6 cores each = 6 cores remote
     # 1 local host with 8 cores = 8 cores local
     # total number of cores is 14, so N = 2*14+1 and M=8
     MAKEOPTS="-j29 -l8"
     FEATURES="distcc"
     }}}
----
 - https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Distcc

=== can't ping under regular user (ping: socket: Operation not permitted) ===
{{{sh
emerge -C net-misc/iputils
emerge net-misc/iputils
}}}

=== write iso image of Windows to usb flash ===
`woeusb --device Win10_1909_Russian_x64.iso /dev/sdc`
